
## Introduction: Without Mises and Hayek mankind drifts towards extinction

In August 10, 1915, British physicist Henry Mosely, who would have probably won the Nobel Prize that year, died in perhaps the most disastrous error mankind has thus far made, The First World War (1914–18). Bright and pious German/French/British/Russian… students, fathers, engineers, "great minds" and "experts", who even shared a common European Christian faith, reverted to their tribal ape-like nature, and for God, honor, flag and country, slaughtered each other leading to about 18 million deaths and millions more left invalid (6.5 million just in France). At 7:30 am July 1st, 1916 the 'Battle of the Somme' began. On this single day, just the British alone, had about 20,000 fatalities and 35,000 wounded. On that day a British soldier was either killed or wounded on average every second. The "honor" of a military career would lead to disproportionately higher losses for the upper classes for all belligerents. Germany's top general, Erich Ludendorff would lose two sons, as would future British Prime Minister Andrew Bonar Law. British Prime Minister at the start of the war, Herbert Asquith, lost one. While about 12% of British troops would die in the war, 31% of Oxford's 1913 graduating class would die. This should help abolish the popular naive myth that politicians are quick to bring about wars while wanting to avoid personal loses in them. Nonsense unfortunately, the slightly smarter apes that we are have been naturally selected to be vicious killers and to enjoy war. Warfare/predation was perhaps the optimal evolutionary strategy and one of the main reasons we are social and have evolved big brains to begin with. As Steven Pinker writes:

>"… men go to war to get or keep women –not necessarily as a conscious goal of the warriors(though often it is exactly that), but as the ultimate payoff that allowed a willingness to fight to evolve. Access to women is the limiting factor on male's reproductive success. Having two wives can double a man's children, having three wives can triple it, and so on. The most common spoils of tribal warfare are women. Raiders kill the men, abduct the nubile women, gang-rape them, and allocate them as wives." [( Steven Pinker's "How the Mind Works" 1999, p. 510)](https://books.google.com/books?id=5cXKQUh6bVQC&pg=PA510&lpg=PA510&dq=%22men+go+to+war+to+get+or+keep+women+%E2%80%93not+necessarily+as+a+conscious%22&source=bl&ots=4RwtAahW_K&sig=ACfU3U0IXRFzLuCSIqv5V30T72_P_PpzSQ&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwin-sGOwe7mAhVJoZ4KHbZ5BvAQ6AEwAHoECAkQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22men%20go%20to%20war%20to%20get%20or%20keep%20women%20%E2%80%93not%20necessarily%20as%20a%20conscious%22&f=false)

First you increase the economic pie available to your self/tribe/gene-pool by coordinating a raid and killing other men (eating them too since cannibalism seems to have been popular in our evolutionary past), and then you increase your reproductive success by raping the women and making them yours. To be successful in war you need a strong sense of unity which translates itself into the strong nationalist/militaristic/patriotic tendencies we are so susceptible to and has the planet littered with nuclear weapons and "civilized" taxpayers believing we must have them. The bond men make as co-warriors is likely stronger than male/female love. A female is easily replaceable (another raid, etc.) but the loss of that co-warrior that will help get the next female and/or defend you when you only get one chance at life is probably even more important. Just like natural selection has shaped us to enjoy sex due to the vital biological/evolutionary importance, it has also shaped us to enjoy war/violence and easily segregating ourselves into the in-group/us/"good" vs. out-group/them/"evil". Given its importance, war/patriotism easily fills us with a great sense of purpose. England's prime minister during WWII and national hero Winston Churchill shows us how inspiring, exciting and purposeful WWI was to him when he mentioned:

>"I think a curse should rest on me - because I love this war. I know it's smashing and shattering the lives of thousands every moment - and yet - I can't help it - I enjoy every second of it." [(Churchill)](https://foreignpolicy.com/2009/02/25/churchills-advice/)

And in another occasion:

>"My God! This is living History. Everything we are doing and saying is thrilling… Why I would not be out of this glorious delicious war for anything the world could give me…" [(Churchill, per Margot Asquith)](https://books.google.com/books?id=MzytDwAAQBAJ&pg=PT297&lpg=PT297&dq=%22My+God!+This+is+living+History.+Everything+we+are+doing+and+saying+is+thrilling%22&source=bl&ots=zYG1LaIeSU&sig=ACfU3U3RqPMPBYEmjxIkEd7kh_p8RBiKrw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiiycmAr-7mAhWVoJ4KHSSzAQIQ6AEwAXoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22My%20God!%20This%20is%20living%20History.%20Everything%20we%20are%20doing%20and%20saying%20is%20thrilling%22&f=false)

Towards the end of WWII, Russia's Red Army is estimated to have raped over 2 million German women. Equally human, the Allies/Americans weren't much better and generally saw the Japanese as an inferior race and cared little for their suffering or views, as US president who nuked Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Harry S. Truman, mentions in a letter:

>"The only language they seem to understand is the one we have been using to bombard them. When you have to deal with a beast you have to treat him as a beast." [(Truman letter to Samuel McCrea Cavert, General Secretary of The Churches of Christ in America)](http://www.nuclearfiles.org/menu/library/correspondence/truman-harry/corr_truman_1945-08-11.htm)

We shouldn't be shocked when men murder, rape and torture, or masturbate to tentacle porn, the real miracle that has taken thousands of years of cultural/legal evolution to create, are the modern cultural values/laws we absorb that program us into respecting the body/property/thoughts of all human beings regardless of age, sex, beliefs, and race. Being the social slightly smarter apes that we are, fellow humans are our biggest assets which helps explain the evolution of altruism/compassion, as well as our biggest competitors which helps us understand our horrendous violence towards fellow men. 

During the early days in the lead-up to World War I there was an atmosphere of joy and excitement as thousands of young men celebrated and volunteered for the coming war which would bring unity, purpose, and glory. After the war when much of Europe lay in ruins people were numb and in a state of stupor, wondering how they could have fooled themselves into such needless carnage. Why did this happen? And if it was such a big deal at the time, worth sacrificing so much, how come hardly anybody knows anything about it today? 20 years later via WWII the tribalistic slaughter led to over 80 million deaths and what followed was a "Cold War" that brought the slightly smarter apes close to nuclear annihilation several times. Why were our "great leaders" and "intellectuals" utterly powerless to prevent the WWI/II slaughters? How can mankind today build mindbogglingly complex microchips, the Internet and so much more, yet still not have figured out something as simple as peace and always be one spark away from another world-wide calamity? There is something missing from our understanding of how the world works, something that our "leading intellectuals" and "experts" have yet to discover and spread accordingly. That "something" has already been discovered and explained by 1974 Nobel Laureate in Economics F.A. Hayek and provides a simple answer to the questions above. However, this answer can be a bit hard to swallow for many, but swallow it we must if we are to survive the next WWI-like calamity which might very well result from the current Coronavirus-related economic shutdowns/policies. The answer is the following: Human beings are slightly smarter vicious apes whose nature and instincts are ideally suited to living in small tribes but find themselves relatively lost in the modern socioeconomic order which is coordinated by things like money, profit/loss calculation, economic competition, interest rates and more. Tribal warfare and rape are things we have been doing for millions of years and are somewhat intuitive, commercial society and understanding the aforementioned economic concepts which have been around for less than a couple thousand years is not. We are sort of living in a matrix or parts of a 'Social Organism' whose workings hardly anyone really understands (unless you have heard of Ludwig von Mises), and whose evolution is understood by and even smaller number of people (Hayek is needed here). Either these men's monumental contributions reach the general public or mankind will prove to be an evolutionary dead-end. It is that simple.


The human body and the numerous "systems" that coordinate it like the respiratory, nervous, and digestive "systems", is the result of the actions of some 30 trillion cells but obviously NOT the result of any conscious planning, designing, or conspiring by them. Thanks to the likes of Darwin and a modern understanding of genetics we can understand how natural selection was the inadvertent "designer" of such systems and complex order. The global socioeconomic order, or what the great British 19th century thinker Herbert Spencer referred to as ["The Social Organism"](https://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/spencer-the-man-versus-the-state-with-six-essays-on-government-society-and-freedom-lf-ed),  is also coordinated by a "system", by what economists of the so-called 'Austrian School', like 1974 Nobel Laureate in Economics F.A. Hayek and his great mentor Ludwig von Mises, referred to as "The Market Process". 'The Market Process' and the "parts" it is composed of like money, prices, economic competition, interest rates, and the legal/religious/governmental frameworks that sustain it, "are indeed the result of human action, but not the execution of any human design" [(Adam Ferguson)](https://www.adamsmith.org/blog/adam-fergusons-great-insight). The 'market process' shares this trait with language which is also a complex mechanism that is the result of human action but was not consciously designed or invented by people/cells. Just like cells are unaware of why they act the way they do and how natural selection has evolved them over billions of years to be parts of complex multi-cellular organisms, so is mankind ignorant of how "processes of selective evolution" have shaped "the brain and society" and created "the market process" which coordinates our actions to create the global socioeconomic order. 

Standing on Mises' shoulders, who provided him with a superb explanation of the workings of the economy and thus all aspects of the market process(money/prices/'interest rates'/etc.) and much, much, much, much more, Hayek would go on to explain how in a few thousand years culture and 'the market process' had co-evolved to transform homo sapiens, from tribes of slightly smarter vicious apes, into today's massively complex global socioeconomic order/'Social Organism' thus arguably becoming the first person in the history of mankind to provide a complete evolutionary understanding of how the world works. Ignorance of how the socioeconomic order works and has evolved is what keeps plunging the slightly smarter apes, regardless of their "experts" and "great leaders", into tribalistic world wars and economic disasters like the current Coronavirus-related economic shutdowns and resulting socioeconomic chaos and tyranny. Hayek is still is so far ahead of our time that even today's leading thinkers, like renowned popular science writer Matt Ridley, are just beginning to catch up to the enormity of his insights. Ridley humbly acknowledges this in a 2011 speech where he mentions:

>"As someone who came to Fredrick von Hayek comparatively late in life, I'm still catching up with him...Indeed, many of the insights I thought I had discovered in my own readings and writings on the frontier of evolutionary biology and economics it turns out Hayek had long before me...It's Hayek who first puts it all together." - [Matt Ridley](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pG-grkJPU8Q)

So how did Hayek 'put it all together'?. Easy. Hayek realized that all living things require precise information to sustain/coordinate/expand their order. If one understands how information coordinates the biological and social orders, then one understands how the world works. It is that simple! Let's briefly try to get a feel for how Hayek saw the world.

What follows below can be roughly divided into two parts, the first discusses how the socioeconomic order works, and the second discusses how it has co-evolved with culture/religion/ideology, not only transforming the way the economy works from self-sufficient violent tribalism to world-wide peaceful trade and commerce, but also how our morals and behavior changed from being those of 'The Law of The Jungle' to "civilized" worldly citizens. Unfortunately, it is 'The Law of The Jungle' that is sort of "built into our DNA" which helps explain why we so often revert to socioeconomic chaos via 'political infighting'/wars/etc. As we do so we try to focus on how economic ignorance is the root of mankind's most pressing problems like the current Coronavirus-related problems, racial problems, and antisemitsm/(Jew-Gentile relations) which continues to play such a disastrous role in the Middle East and propagates fallacious/polarizing "good" vs. "evil" thinking with countless potential civilization-ending repercussions. 


Someday, if mankind does not destroy itself, Mises and Hayek will be as well-known as Darwin is today. These men were, and still are, just way ahead of our times and hopefully this book can help us catch up before it is too late. 

