
### The Evolution of Money: The Gospel of Menger

In the example above what if Tom was not interested in Mark's pastries and wanted a blanket instead? Mark would have to find the blanket-maker, hope he was interested in his pastries, make the trade, and finally trade the blanket for the basket. But what if the blanket-maker was not interested in pastries either and wanted wine instead? One gets the point. This problem, of having to run around setting up intermediate trades to make the trade you really want is commonly referred to as “The Double Coincidence of Wants” problem because for a trade to happen you need the coincidence that both parties are interested in the goods they have available for trade. We must always keep in mind that biological order/life, whether it is the cells that make up a person, and therefore the person and therefore the social order, is in a constant cycle of production and consumption of wealth. The man who spends 3 hours setting up a trade is consuming food/energy, his family and all that depends on his production will be consuming as well. The more time/wealth you have to spend/consume running around setting up the intermediate trades the less you can produce, and there will come a point where you will be more productive hunting and gathering and abandoning all the benefits of trade than spending all day setting up intermediate trades while you starve to death. So the great benefits of trade like the division of labor and knowledge which is necessary for civilization can only be realized if we solve the double coincidence of wants problem.

This is where the evolution of money comes into existence. As people traded, they realized that there were some goods that most people were willing to trade for, not necessarily because they wanted to consume them, but because they knew they could later use them to trade for the things they really wanted. For example, let's assume Mark is now a member of a 1,000 member market-oriented society where goats were very common. People could use them for their skin/fur, milk, and meat, and most households had at least a few. Because of this, even if Mark already had more goats than he needed for milk/skin/meat, he would still be willing to accept them as payment for his pastries because he knew that given the goats’ popularity there was a high chance that he could later trade the goats for the other goods he really needed. Even if the basket-maker/Tom did not want Mark's pastries there would be a good chance that he would accept one of his goats, and even if he didn’t want the goat either and Mark had to contact the blanket-maker, if he did accept the goat it would have saved Mark from having to see if the wine-maker would trade with him. Essentially what happens is that by offering to trade a more popular good Mark increases the chances that his attempt at trading will be successful so the average number of intermediate trades goes down the more widely accepted the goats are.

Once people started using a common ‘medium of exchange’(the goats) the double coincidence of wants problem went away and goats became the money in the society. The more people, say Adam, Biff, and Cindy, started accepting goats in exchange for their products, not just because they valued the goats due to their milk/fur/meat, but because they too realized that they could later trade them for what they wanted, in other words, the more people valued them as money, the more incentive others, say Dan, Ellen, and Frank, would have to also accept goats as a form of payment because they saw how Adam, Biff, and Cindy would later accept the goats as well. Goats now were valuable for 4 things, their skin/fur, milk, meat, and as money, as something people value because others will trade for it, therefore making the goats valuable and tradable with an even greater number of people. More people begin to accept goats as payment because they realize they can trade them with more people, leading to more people noticing that more people are accepting goats and so on, until eventually the majority of people, if not all, would be using goats and thus goats became the major source of money.

Without money one trades two specific goods for each other but a lot of unproductive time and effort must be wasted making intermediary trades to trade for what you really need. Using money two quick trades take place, first one quickly trades a specific good for the generally accepted good (money), then one quickly trades the generally accepted money for what one really needs. I would sell a batch of my coconut pastries for money (a goat), and then quickly trade the goat for the basket or knife, assuming everyone accepts goats by now. Thanks to money, very little time, effort, and consumption needs to take place while one does the trading, leaving that time/wealth available for increased production and growth.

In the example above as well as in the real world it is important to note that money was not a deliberate invention on the part of any individual or government. What eventually becomes money naturally arises as it is inadvertently selected by people following their own selfish interests. By inadvertently overcoming the ‘Double Coincidence of Wants’ problem, these societies inadvertently enjoyed the benefits that trade brings to a social order. As great economist and modern founder of the Austrian School of Economics Carl Menger tells us:

>"As each economizing individual becomes increasingly more aware of his economic interest, he is led by this interest, without any agreement, without legislative compulsion, and even without regard to the public interest, to give his commodities in exchange for other, more saleable, commodities, even if he does not need them for any immediate [consumption purpose."](https://mises.org/library/nature-and-origin-money)

 
The easier it is to trade, the more fluid, and faster the previously mentioned benefits of trade occur and the faster the society that benefits from them will be able to constantly rearrange its social order into increasingly more productive and technologically advanced states.

Given that money greatly facilitates trade and therefore greatly increases the rate at which a society progresses we have to now consider what qualities lead to the best money. For example, let's say a society uses elephants for money, elephants are big and indivisible. You might be interested in trading some of your elephants for blankets but you feel like one elephant for one blanket is way too much, unfortunately you can't offer a quarter of an elephant. Elephants can also run away, get sick and die, and can get very angry and destroy property. So a society that used elephants for trading might miss out on many trading opportunities. So what are some of the qualities that make good money?

1. Wide acceptance as a medium of exchange. You want the money to be accepted by as many people as possible, this allows you to trade for the most amount of goods and services. Goods and services that now become available to your calculating brain.

2. It should be seen as valuable by itself, like gold for example. Gold can be used as money yet it is valuable for ornaments and industrial purposes. This greatly helps meet quality #1. If something is valuable by itself, more people are willing to trade for it which means that you will be able to trade this money for a greater amount of goods and services.

3. You want money to be durable. You don’t want your money to be burnt away, or die or run away from you like an elephant can. You want it to be a durable store of value.

4. Divisible and easily aggregated. You want to be able to divide the money into smaller units to enable trades for items of low value and you also want to be able to combine your money into large quantities to facilitate expensive trades.

5. Convenience. Money should be convenient to carry and transfer.

6. Money should be relatively scarce or hard to manufacture. This is an INCREDIBLY important quality, the future and very progress of mankind depends on it and we will discuss why later.

Cattle were the most commonly used form of money in early civilizations, Menger again:

 
>"In the earliest periods of economic development, cattle seem to have been the most saleable commodity among most peoples of the ancient world. Domestic animals constituted the chief item of the wealth of every individual among nomads and peoples passing from a nomadic economy to agriculture. Their marketability extended literally to all economizing individuals, and the lack of artificial roads combined with the fact that cattle transported themselves(almost without cost in the primitive stages of civilization!) to make them saleable over a wider geographical area than most other commodities…The trade and commerce of the most cultured people of the ancient world, the Greeks … showed no trace of coined money even as late as the time of Homer. Barter still prevailed, and wealth consisted of herds of cattle. Payments were made in cattle. Prices were reckoned in cattle. And cattle were used for the payment of fines… Among the Arabs, the cattle standard existed as late as [the time of Mohammed."](https://books.google.com/books?id=pFva23_vWzkC&pg=PA263&lpg=PA263&dq=%22In+the+earliest+periods+of+economic+development,+cattle+seem+to+have+been+the+most+saleable%22&source=bl&ots=ibFegT8Qx5&sig=ACfU3U0B3UP9h1e5nYML-xcn9LJt9J13ig&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjsi4a2tPnrAhXOpFkKHXvPD1UQ6AEwBHoECAgQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22In%20the%20earliest%20periods%20of%20economic%20development%2C%20cattle%20seem%20to%20have%20been%20the%20most%20saleable%22&f=false)

 

As societies progressed and became more centered around life in cities, the daily activities of the average person dealt less and less with animals, and the "animal standard" of money was slowly replaced by the "metallic" standard which used coins made out of metals like copper, silver, and gold. Menger continues:

>"Copper was the earliest metal from which the farmer’s plough, the warrior’s weapons, and the artisan’s tools were fashioned. Copper, gold, and silver were the earliest materials used for vessels and ornaments of all kinds. At the cultural stage at which peoples passed from cattle-money to an exclusively metallic currency, therefore, copper and perhaps some of its alloys were goods of very general use, and gold and silver, as the most important means of satisfying that most universal passion of primitive men, the desire to stand out in appearance before the other members of the tribe, had become goods of [most general desire."](https://www.google.com/books/edition/Principles_of_Economics/pFva23_vWzkC?hl=en&gbpv=1&dq=%22Copper+was+the+earliest+metal+from+which+the+farmer%E2%80%99s+plough%22&pg=PA266&printsec=frontcover)

 

The change from animal standard to metallic coins did not happen overnight or in all cultures, it was a gradual change, many cultures went through periods were both standards were used at the same time. By the 1800’s as far as we are concerned the modern Western world was using gold and silver. As the social order progressed these two metals, especially gold, emerged as the best money around. Both do a great job of meeting the 6 criteria for good money. Let’s just focus on gold from now on and see why.

It is widely accepted as money, everyone knows gold is valuable and willing to accept it as a form of payment. Gold does not rust or burn away, it can be stored and not decay for an eternity as far as people are concerned, it is durable. It can easily be melted and divided into smaller pieces of any size and also combined to make large purchases. It is easy to carry around. It is very heavy but by the time it gets too heavy to carry you are making very large and infrequent purchases.

So let’s recap. To understand mankind, his past, and his future, is to understand the growth and characteristics which enable, motivate, facilitate, or impede the growth of the social order. Social orders that don’t grow are overtaken by those that do, and since we are alive right now, we happen to be part of a social order that so far has managed to grow or at least maintain and defend its order. We always have to keep in mind that societies succeed or fail based on their growth and technology and more often than not how the previous two lead to the ability to kick butt. More productive social orders can afford to feed and clothe bigger and better equipped armies. I am not saying that we are alive today because we are descendants of a single order that stumbled upon the right economic institutions like the use of money and others we still have to discuss, this is obviously not the case. What happens is that as societies grow, conquer, are conquered, assimilate values, spread values, and so on, the technologies, good ideas and customs are more or less retained.  At this point in the book this simple bare-bones evolutionary approach to social evolution will do but we will look into this sort of thing in more depth as we go along.