

# How The World Works : An Introduction to 1974 Nobel Laureate in Economics F.A. Hayek

Understanding how the world works is surprisingly easy. 1974 Nobel Laureate in Economics F.A. Hayek was perhaps the first person to explain how the world works using a simple evolutionary paradigm. Hayek writes:

>>"We understand now that all enduring structures above the level of the simplest atoms, and up to the brain and society, are the results of, and can be explained only in terms of, processes of selective evolution…"

This essay attempts to summarize Hayek and like-minded friend's insights.

## Production and Consumption

Everything that happens is a transformation or relocation of matter. If things are "alive" then the relocation of matter is guided by information which can keep the order/life/'enduring structure' going. Living things and society are self-perpetuating orders that are in continuous cycles of wealth production and consumption. Production involves the transformation or relocation of matter to create wealth, and consumption transforms/relocates wealth/matter in a way that sustains or expands living things/orders and their internal parts/orders. The Sun sends us photons/energy which the process of photosynthesis is able to store in chemical form. This energy is then used to power the cycles of production/consumption as plants use the energy to grow and sustain their order, and animals, by eating the plants, do likewise. If there is more production than consumption then the order is profitable and thus has additional wealth with which to sustain itself for longer periods and/or grow. For example, paramecium are single-celled life-forms that produce food/wealth by swimming around and swallowing small bacteria which they then consume by digesting and transforming them into the various nutrients/wealth needed to maintain and expand the paramecium's internal order and thus life. A more complex multi-cellular animal like a person, is simply a collection of cells (which are themselves orders) which must be productive as a whole in order to produce and then consume the necessary wealth needed to nourish itself and the sub-orders/organs/cells/organelles it is composed of. Today we not only have biological order, we have social order, or what the great 19th century British intellectual Herbert Spencer referred to as the "Social Organism", which is rapidly growing and increasing its 'rate of production', in other words, the rate at which it transforms the earth's matter into human usable wealth/order/life/biomass. Every year, increasingly automated building-sized machinery in the mining industries scrape/mine less than 10 cubic miles of matter from the earth's massive volume of 260 billion cubic miles. This matter is 'collaboratively transformed' or relocated by billions of people as trillions of dollars worth of wealth in terms of cars/computers/buildings/products/etc. are produced thus increasing the word's economic pie of wealth and social order. These continuous cycles of production and consumption require precise knowledge/information. By focusing on how information arises, spreads, and guides these cycles of production and consumption which lead to order/life/society we can have a simple yet profound understanding of how the entire world works.

## Creation and Spread of Information via Biological Evolution

The biological order is created via the well-known mechanism of 'biological evolution' with genes being like the sentences which store the information necessary to create/coordinate life/order. Mutations cause new genes and thus new information to arise which leads to a different life-form which is then 'naturally selected' as it inadvertently competes with others, with the winner reproducing more and thus passing on more copies of the better-adapted/"fitter" genes/information/design to future generations.

## Creation and Spread of Information via Economic Competition

Your life, the wealth you consume, the entire global economy and thus all of human civilization is the inadvertent result of a simple concept or better said, tradition. The tradition of private property. Private property means that a person owns and has the freedom to use his property as he desires/calculates. Freedom to trade private property with anyone in the entire planet inadvertently transforms billions of free people into a global super-computer where all companies are motivated to innovate and learn from each other thus inadvertently cooperate to discover superior information with which to serve customers and reorder all of mankind. Companies that don’t successfully compete (innovate/learn) won’t get enough revenue/wealth to pay a competitive wage, motivating employees to once again use their freedom to trade, this time their labor, to quit and join the increasingly better-informed and thus more productive and thus higher-paying companies. Just like in the Olympics we can discover the best athletes in the world due to global competition, so does free-trade among all nations allows the best ideas to compete and spread globally thus ensuring the best possible global order. As cost-cutting ideas emerge and inevitably spread via competition leading relative prices to continuously fall, new profitable ideas easily arise and once again spread via competition in an endless cycle of knowledge generation/innovation. For example, computers were once very expensive, but once the price of making them came down enough, people easily realized that every home could have them, which gave birth to our computerized world and the Internet and all the great things that flow from it. The more wealth is produced, the more wealth has to be offered in exchange for labor as companies/orders compete against each other for the labor they need which helps explain why the economic pie grows for everyone.  

Morals are simply ways of acting, they are knowledge, which like most knowledge, emerges and spreads via economic competition. It is hard-working, tolerant, courteous people who thanks to competition inevitably motivate everyone else to be likewise. As Hayek tells us:

>>“Competition is, after all, always a process in which a small number makes it necessary for larger numbers to do what they do not like, be it to work harder, to change habits, or to devote a degree of attention, continuous application, or regularity to their work which without competition would not be needed.” (Hayek)

As millions of Italians, Britons, Germans and other immigrants from all over the world came to America and the Statue of Liberty served it's true purpose of welcoming them, it was ultimately the competition which grows from ‘private property’ and thus individual liberty/freedom which stripped these people of their otherwise nationalistic/ethnocentric/tribalistic identities and evolved what came to be seen as the classic American character/ethos of wanting to be seen as a reputable/honest businessman/professional who treats everyone with respect and wears a business suit as opposed to older religious/ethnocentric dress. 

Finance/banking and interest rates are other important aspects of the 'Market Process'. Besides the more obvious function of safeguarding savings and pooling the savings/wealth of many people to allow the execution of bigger projects which would have been impossible if entrepreneurs were limited to the few savings of friends and family, banking/finance and more specifically the phenomenon of 'interest rates' also play a nearly miraculous role. If we assume that the general interest rate is at 5%, we can divide minds into two categories. 1) Those that have relatively inferior knowledge or business plans that can grow the economic pie by less than 5% and will be motivated to refrain from consumption by lending their savings to banks to earn the 7% interest, and 2) those minds that have superior knowledge or business plans which can grow the economic pie by more than 5% and will be motivated to become borrowers of the previously saved funds and get to consume the wealth the savers had refrained from consuming as they implement the business plans they expect to yield a higher than 5% return on investment so that they can pay back the loans with interest and keep the rest as profit. As if by magic, we can see how interest rates motivate the accumulation and movement of saved(unconsumed) wealth from minds that have inferior ideas to minds that have superior ideas thus giving a tremendous sort of 'computational boost' to those societies/orders that allow charging interest on loans. 

It is vitally important to keep in mind that living orders/society are in constant cycles of wealth production/consumption, and that the production of wealth requires the consumption/use of existing wealth and that simply increasing the amount of money is obviously NOT the same thing as increasing the amount of unconsumed wealth/savings. For example, if 10,000 men are to spend 2 years building/producing an airplane factory, they must consume/use the concrete/materials/food/energy/transportation/shelter that they (as well as their dependents/family) will consume while they produce the factory. If the needed real wealth or the means/wealth to create it already exists, because it had been previously produced and then remains unconsumed/SAVED, good. But if instead of real wealth/savings, governments/banks simply increase the amount money while no corresponding increase in REAL wealth/savings exists, all it is doing is increasing the amount of money per unit of wealth, thus higher prices than would have otherwise been the case, which eventually causes many entrepreneurs to face the obvious fact that there did not exist enough wealth at the right prices to complete their projects in a profitable way, so a sort of bust/chaos will happen as inevitable bankruptcies occur. Sustaining the men's consumption for 8 months to create some half-finished building/machines and then running out of wealth leads to 0 planes/wealth for a massive loss. Even easier, imagine two wealthy couples each with a child who both want to go out on the same night (project) but there is only one baby-sitter(savings/wealth), no amount of money will allow both to execute their plans, what they need is more savings/wealth/baby-sitters. Bottom line, governments via their central banks and money-creation can't help the economy and are the source of disastrous business "boom/bust" cycles. We quote the great economist Ludwig von Mises:

>>"However conditions may be, it is certain that no manipulations of the banks can provide the economic system with capital goods[baby-sitter/wealth]. What is needed for a sound expansion of production is additional capital goods[savings/wealth], not money… The boom is built on the sands of banknotes and deposits. It must collapse." (Mises, p. 559)[present author]








